Chapter 11 - Compiler II: Code Generation

=Term list=
{|
|中文
|English
|-
|编译器
|a compiler
|-
|词法分析
|tokenization
|-
|语法分析
|syntax analysis
|-
|代码生成
|code generation
|-
|符号表
|a symbol table
|-
|（编程语言的）符号
|a symbol
|-
|（编程语言的）关键字
|a keyword
|-
|（用户定义的）变量名、类名、函数名
|an identifier
|-
|递归
|recursion
|-
|递归下降（算法）
|recursive-descent
|-
|构造函数
|construtor
|-
|普通方法
|method
|-
|静态方法
|function
|-
|成员变量
|field
|-
|静态变量
|static
|-
|局部变量
|local, local variables
|-
|形式参数（形参）
|parameters
|-
|实际参数（实参）
|arguments
|-
|虚拟机
|a virtual machine, VM
|-
|字节码
|bytecode
|-
|汇编语言（組合語言）
|assembly language
|-
|寄存器
|register
|-
|（编程语言的）句法
|syntax
|-
|缩进
|indentation
|}

=11.0 Introduction=
In chapter 9, we discover that it is much easier to write programs in Jack language than in VM language. Further, we implement a tokenizer and a syntax analyzer in chapter 10. With the syntax tree, it is time now to accomplish our last task: generate VM, or virtual machine, instructions from the syntax tree in an XML document. This step is called code generation, in which the compiler is responsible for maintaining several symbol tables to map from an identifier to its address in the stack of the VM. 

Let's review the three stages we talked about in the last chapter: (See Figure 10.1 in textbook)
*tokenization: Extract tokens (symbols, keywords, constants, and identifiers) from the source code in Jack.
*syntax analysis: Analyze the syntax based on the tokens, and generate a syntax tree if no syntax errors occur in the source file. 
*code generation: Generate the target code in VM language according to the syntax tree. 

We focus on the last stage in this chapter. 

=11.1 Background=
*Logic Model
**Background
***Convert the Jack language into VM language.
**Target / Goal
***Write a Jack VM code generator in Java, using recursive descent. 
**Outcomes/Impacts
***Our code generator passes all the test samples, generating the same VM codes as the sample compiler does
**Inputs
***Chapter 11 in textbook
***Sample codes written in Jack, for test
***A sample Jack Compiler, which parses sample Jack codes into VM codes
**Activities
***Learn recursive descent
***Write our Jack code generator in Java
***Compare oour output with that of the test samples
**Outputs
***A Jack code generator in Java, along with an HTTP Web API


=11.2 Code Generation Specification=
To generate VM codes, the code generator should maintain several symbol tables: 
*symbol table for local variables
*symbol table for arguments
*symbol table for fields
*symbol table for static members

These symbol tables are implemented using hash map, a data structure that stores key-value pairs. Each entry in the symbol table stores the type and the offset of an identifier. As in chapter 10, we use the same example: 

<source lang="jack">
class Adder {
    field int x, y;
    method int add() {
        return x + y;
    }
}
</source>

For the handler for the class, it maintains a symbol table for the two fields <code>x</code> and <code>y</code>. It is similar to the table below: 

{|
|Name
|Type
|Offset
|-
|x
|int
|0
|-
|y
|int
|1
|}

This table is created when the code generator scans the declaration <code>field int x, y;</code> in the syntax tree. And when it generate codes for the expression <code>x + y</code>, it looks them up in the table and finds the offset for the indentifiers. So, it knows the offset for <code>x</code> is 0, and write the line <code>push this 0</code> to push the value of <code>x</code> into the stack. It does the similarly for <code>y</code>, and the expression becomes

<source lang="vm">
push this 0
push this 1
add
</source>

The code for the whole method becomes

<source lang="vm">
push argument 0
pop pointer 0
push this 0
push this 1
add
return
</source>

The first two lines are added because the argument 0 is the address of this instance for its method. We put it in the <code>this</code> register by <code>pop pointer 0</code>. We do not add these two lines for a function, which is a "static" method of the class, not of some instance of the class. 

==11.2.1 Recursive descent approach==

Similar to our syntax analyzer, the code generator also generates codes using recursive descent. This time, however, this descent is even easier than it is in chapter 10, for we have already generated the syntax tree. With the tree at hand, recursive descent is no longer a obstacle. In contrast, it was more difficult in chapter 10 since the tree structure is not very clear in the Jack code itself, which has ambiguity in some cases (see Section 10.4). 

<source lang="jack">
class Adder {
    field int x, y;
    method int add() {
        return x + y;
    }
}
</source>

The syntax tree is generated by the analyzer: 

<source lang="xml">
<class>
    <keyword>class</keyword>
    <identifier>Adder</identifier>
    <symbol>{</symbol>
    <classVarDec>
        <keyword>field</keyword>
        <keyword>int</keyword>
        <identifier>x</identifier>
        <symbol>,</symbol>
        <identifier>y</identifier>
        <symbol>;</symbol>
    </classVarDec>
    <subroutineDec>
        <keyword>method</keyword>
        <keyword>int</keyword>
        <identifier>add</identifier>
        <symbol>(</symbol>
        <parameterList>
        </parameterList>
        <symbol>)</symbol>
        <symbol>{</symbol>
        <statements>
            <returnStatement>
                <keyword>return</keyword>
                <expression>
                    <term>
                        <identifier>x</identifier>
                    </term>
                    <symbol>+</symbol>
                    <term>
                        <identifier>y</identifier>
                    </term>
                <symbol>;</symbol>
                </expression>
            </returnStatement>
        </statements>
        <symbol>}</symbol>
    </subroutineDec>
    <symbol>}</symbol>
</class>
</source>

Using recursion, we only focus on one level each time. When processing the <code>class</code> level, we inpterpret the code as follows: 

<source lang="xml">
<class>
    <keyword>class</keyword>
    <identifier>Adder</identifier>
    <symbol>{</symbol>
    <classVarDec>
        to be handled recursively
    </classVarDec>
    <subroutineDec>
        to be handled recursively
    </subroutineDec>
    <symbol>}</symbol>
</class>
</source>

Now, it is time to generate VM bytecodes.  

=11.3 Implementation using recursive descent=
Our implementation is in Java, a popular object-oriented programming language. The source code is public at <a href="https://github.com/kingium/JackCompiler">GitHub</a> with a readme file. It is equiped with an HTTP Web API, which can be deployed in any server with Java SE installed. 

Besides the Web API, our module <code>JackCompiler</code> consists of three modules. The module <code>JackCodeGenerator</code> is for this chapter. 

==11.3.1 The CodeGenerator Module==
The code generator traverse the syntax tree, which is an XML document. Each element in the XML document serves as an input to some handlers. This process is done recursively, from the top of the syntax tree to its bottom. The processor for <code>class</code> element reads in all its <code>classVarDec</code> elements, and constructs a symbol table for them, called a "field table". Then, it calls subordinate functions to process each <code>subroutineDec</code> elements. 

For each type of subroutines (function, method, constructor), we have specific handlers. For example, for the <code>procConstructor</code> method, the Java code goes like this: 

<source lang="java">
private void procConstructor(Element node) throws JackCompilerException {
    ArrayList<Element> children = getChildren(node);
    String returnType = children.get(1).getFirstChild().getNodeValue();
    String subroutineName = children.get(2).getFirstChild().getNodeValue();

    codes.add("function " + className + "." + subroutineName + " " + Integer.toString(localMap.size()));

    codes.add("push constant " + Integer.toString(this.fieldMap.size()));
    codes.add("call Memory.alloc 1");
    codes.add("pop pointer 0");

    procSubroutineStatements(children.get(6));
}
</source>

It first gets the subroutine name and type of the return value. Then, it generates the code <code>"function " + className + "." + subroutineName + " " + Integer.toString(localMap.size())</code>, which is a function definition in VM. The class name is put before the subroutine name, separated by a dot. The following three lines of codes are memory allocation, and the code generator uses the field map to determine how much space to allocate. Finally, it calls another function to handle the statements of this subroutine, by passing it the XML element <code>children.get(6)</code> in the syntax tree.

=11.4 Perspective=
The VM language is process-oriented, while Jack, to some extent, is an object-oriented programming (OOP) language, albeit key features of OOP like derivation and polymorphism are not supported by Jack. The conversion is usually not trivial, but in our project it is not that difficult because of the features above that Jack lacks. To investigate how to convert an OOP language in process-oriented VM, let's see what changes we make during the code generation:

==11.4.1 Convert Classes to Structures==
A class without any subroutines in it is identical to a structure (like <code>struct</code> in C). Each field in the class is equivalent to a member of the structure. For a class with some subroutines, however, we deal with the subroutines in a different way (See below)

==11.4.2 Convert Methods to Functions==
Each subroutine in a class can be converted to a function in VM by puting the class name before the subroutine name, separated by a dot. For example, the constructor <code>add</code> of the class <code>Adder</code> becomes <code>Adder.add</code> in VM. 
*For a function in Jack, it is directly converted to a function in VM.
*For a method in Jack, a hidden parameter <code>this</code> is added before all other parameters. <code>this</code> contains the address of the current instance. 
*For a constructor, it is directly conoverted to a function in VM, with some codes added to allocate memory to the fields of the instance to construct.

==11.4.2 Convert Method Calls to Function Calls==
Suppose you have an instance of <code>Adder</code> called adder, and you call its <code>adder</code> method in Jack: 

<source lang="jack">
let y = adder.add(x, 1);
</source>

The code generator, seeing this statement, will look up <code>adder</code> in the symbol tables, and learns it is a local variable. Then, it knows <code>add</code> must be a method of its class. Therefore, before pushing parameters <code>x</code> and <code>1</code> into the stack, it will first push the address of the instance itself: (Suppose <code>adder</code>, <code>x</code> nad <code>y</code> is local variables in addresses 0, 1 and 2 respectively)

<source lang="vm">
push local 0      // address of adder
push local 1      // value of x
push constant 1   // integer constant 1
call Adder.add    // call the add method
pop local 2       // pop the return value to y
</source>

=11.5 Project=
==11.5.1 JackCodeGenerator==
This class has a public constructor and several public methods: 
*(constructor) <source lang="java">public JackCodeGenerator(Document doc)</source>
*<source lang="java">public ArrayList<String> generate() throws JackCompilerException</source>

This class takes an XML document (from the JackAnalyzer module) as its input, and parses it into VM codes. Here is the <a href="https://github.com/kingium/JackCompiler/blob/master/test/Square.jack">sample input</a> together with the corresponding <a href="https://github.com/kingium/JackCompiler/blob/master/test/Square.vm">sample output</a>. 

=11.6 Glossary=
{|
|Keywords
|-
|compiler
|-
|syntax analysis
|-
|code generation
|-
|symbol table
|-
|recursive-descent
|-
|parameters
|-
|arguments
|-
|virtual machine, VM
|-
|bytecode
|-
|register
|-
|syntax
|}

=11.7 References=
*Nisan, N. & Schocken, S. (2005). The Elements of Computing Systems: Building a Modern Computer from First Principles. Prentice-Hall of India

=11.8 Additional Reading Material=
*LL parser. (2017, December 13). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 03:18, December 21, 2017, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=LL_parser&oldid=815200886 
*Recursive descent parser. (2017, November 16). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 03:19, December 21, 2017, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recursive_descent_parser&oldid=810700680 
*XML. (2017, December 11). In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. Retrieved 03:39, December 21, 2017, from https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=XML&oldid=814880050 
